A. Litvin (Shmuel Leib Hurwitz)

A. Litvin (1862–1943) was a Yiddish journalist, poet, editor, and folklorist. He traveled between New York and Europe, where he collected material on Yiddish folklore and village life.Learn more.


Kotik's Café

kotiks-cafe


Café Ostrowski

cafe-ostrowski


Abraham Cahan

Abraham Cahan (1860-1951) was a Lithuanian-born American author. At 37 years old, Cahan was the first editor of the pro-working class Yiddish newspaper, Forverts, which appeared on the streets of New York in April 1897.Learn more.


Adah Isaacs Menken

Adah Isaacs Menken (1835-1868) was an American actress and poet, internationally famous for her starring role in the equestrian melodrama Mazeppa, in which she was stripped on stage to a flesh-colored body stocking. Adah lead a glamorous and spectacular life as a celebrity, often blurring the line between performance and reality. Fervently Jewish in adulthood, Adah once said of her faith that"Through that pure and simple religion I have found greatest comfort and blessing.”Learn more.


Adolf Hurwitz

Adolf Hurwitz (1859-1919) was a mathematician born in Hildesheim, Germany, to a Jewish family.​Learn more.


Ahad Ha'am  (Asher Zvi Hirsch Ginsberg)

Ahad Ha'am (1856-1927) was a Hebrew essayist and Zionist thinker. Raised by a wealthy Hasidic family, he broke with Hasidism in his adolescence and began gravitating toward the Haskalah. In 1886 he, his wife, their children, and his parents settled in Odessa, where Ha'am quickly became a prominent figure in the Ḥoveve Tsiyon movement. After living in Russia and then London for a time, Ahad Ha'am moved to Tel Aviv in 1921.​Learn more.


Aharon Reuveni

Aharon Reuveni (1886–1971) was born in Ukraine, went to the U.S. in 1904, returned to Poland in 1906, was exiled to Siberia in 1908, and escaped to Palestine in 1910. He was a Hebrew writer, publishing a wide variety of literature including poems, novels, and research in the early history of the Jewish people.  Learn more.


Casino Café

casino-cafe


Akiva Arieh Weiss

Akiva Arieh Weiss (1868-1947) migrated from Łódź in Congress Poland to Palestine in 1906. He was instrumental in the founding of The Ahuzat Bayit Society in Jaffa, supporting the creation of the "garden suburb" which would become Tel Aviv.Learn more.


Akiva's Café

The famous actor Jacob Adler used to spend his evenings with other actors in Café Fanconi and in the Jewish-owned Akiva's café on Rivnoya Street, where theatrical rehearsals and performances took place.


Strunsky's Café "Three Steps Down"

strunskys-cafe-three-steps-down


Aleksander Wat

Aleksander Wat (1900–1967) was born in Warsaw, Poland, and was descended from an illustrious Jewish family. He studied philosophy, psychology, and logic at Warsaw University and was a key figure in Eastern European interwar avant-garde movements.​Learn more.


Café Ziemianska

cafe-ziemianska


Aleksandr Kuprin

Aleksandr Kuprin (1870-1938) was a Russian novelist and short-story writer in the style of critical realism.Learn more.


Alexander Penn

Alexander Penn (1906-1972) was an Israeli poet who migrated from Russia to Mandatory Palestine in 1927. ​Learn more.


Café Kassit

cafe-kassit


Alfred Döblin

Alfred Döblin (1878-1957) was a German novelist and essayist of the Expressionist movement. Fleeing the Nazi takeover in Germany, he migrated to France in 1933 and then to America in 1940.​Learn more.


Café des Westens

cafe-des-westens


Alfred Kazin

Alfred Kazin (1915-1998) was born in Brooklyn to Russian Jewish immigrants. He was a critic and author noted for his studies of American literature and his autobiographical writings.Learn more.


Amir Gilboa

Amir Gilboa (1917-1984) was a Ukraine-born Israeli poet. Learn more.


Arkaden/Arcaden Café

arkadenarcaden-cafe


Daniel Charney (Tsharni)

Daniel Tsharni (1888–1959) was a Yiddish poet and journalist, born in Belorussia. Devoting many articles to Soviet Yiddish culture, Tsharni moved frequently around Europe, arriving in the United States in 1941.Learn more.


Arthur Koestler

Arthur Koestler (1905-1983) was a Hungarian-born British novelist, journalist, and critic.Learn more.


Ha-gina (The Hungarian Café)

ha-gina-the-hungarian-cafe


Arthur Schnitzler

Arthur Schnitzler (1862-1931) was an Austrian playwright and author. Learn more.


Café Central

"Arthur Schnitzler, born in Vienna, 1862, to Jewish migrants from Hungary, became a physician, playwright and writer of fiction, and was one of the members of Vienna’s famed Jung Wien. He wrote in his autobiography about the time he was a medical student in the early 1880s, in which he preferred to meet his friends outside the University of Vienna “on a more neutral ground, in a more congenial atmosphere.” The “neutral ground,” for Schintzler was “usually some coffeehouse, like Café Central, where I would spend hours reading the papers, playing billiard and dominoes, and...chess, with a gray- bearded Polish [i.e. east European] Jewish man.” Schnitzler wrote that in spite of being a medical student, he felt “altogether so much more at home” in the atmosphere of the café, “especially when there was a bohemian air about it.”47" (99)


Avigdor Hameiri

Avigdor Hameiri (1890–1970) was a Hebrew writer from a small village in Hungary. After World War I, Hameiri migrated to Odessa, and in 1921 he immigrated to Palestine, where he dedicated himself to literary work, theatrical productions, and a wide variety of journalistic activities.​Learn more.


Avraham Ben-Yitzhak

Avraham Ben-Yitzhak (1883-1950) was born in Galicia and eventually moved to Mandatory Palestine. He published only eleven poems and was known for his long silences.Learn more.


Avraham Halfi

Avraham Halfi (1904-1980) was an Israeli actor and Hebrew poet from Poland.Learn more.


Café Sheleg Levanon

cafe-sheleg-levanon


Café Retzki

cafe-retzky


Avraham Leib Shalkovich (a.k.a. Ben-Avigdor)

Avraham Leib Shalkovich (1866–1921) was a Hebrew writer and publisher. He set up the first publicly funded Jewish printing press, Aḥi’asaf, and published a variety of Jewish literature.Learn more.


Avraham Naton

Avraham Naton (1906-1959) was an Israeli painter. View his artwork here.


Avraham Shlonsky

Avraham Shlonsky (1900-1973) was an Israeli poet, editor, translator, playwright, and publicist. He immigrated to Israel in 1921, and eventually settled in Tel Aviv where he joined other Jewish writers dedicated to their radical vision of modern Hebrew poetry.Learn more.


Avrom Goldfaden

Considered the “Father of Yiddish Theater,” Avrom Goldfaden (1840–1908) was a playwright, theater director, poet, and impresario.​Learn more.


Avrom Moyshe Fuchs

Avrom Moyshe Fuchs (1890–1974) was a Yiddish short story writer and journalist. During his lifetime, Fuchs lived and worked in Lemberg, New York, Vienna, London, and Israel.Learn more.


Avrom Reyzen (Abraham Reisen)

Avrom Reyzen (1876–1953) was a writer, poet, and editor. Reyzen lived in St. Petersberg, Vilna, Warsaw, and New York, publishing literary periodicals and becoming known for simple and memorable poems and short stories.Learn more.


Café Glotser

cafe-glotser


Café Europa

cafe-europa


Ḥayim Naḥman Bialik

Ḥayim Naḥman Bialik (1873–1934) was born in Ukraine and lived for a time in the Jewish cultural hub of Odessa. In 1924, Bialik moved to Palestine and built a house in Tel Aviv on a street that was named after him in his lifetime. He came to be known as Israel's national poet.Learn more.


Barry Frydlender

Barry Frydlender is an artist who was born in Tel Aviv in 1954.See into Frydlender's exhibit "Place and Time" at the MoMA.


Baruch Glasman

Baruch Glasman (1893-1945) was a prolific fiction writer in English, Yiddish, and Hebrew, publishing in journals around the world.Learn more.


Café Royal

cafe-royal


Moldavanka

Moldavanka is a neighborhood in Odessa where many middle-class and poor Jewish migrants lived. By the late 19th and early 20th century, Moldavanka had become infamous for its destitute Jewish residents and for poverty and crime, which was reflected in the literature about Odessa.The most memorable depictions of Moldavanka are found in the stories of Isaac Babel, who was born there in 1894. Babel’s most famous Odessan character is the gangster Benya Krik, the self-proclaimed “king of Odessa.” Benya Krik was based on the real figure of Mishka Yaponchik (Moisey Volfovich Vinnitsky), who operated mostly in Moldavanka and whom Babel knew well.


Benyamin Tammuz

Benyamin Tammuz (1919-1989) was born in Russia and immigrated to Israel at age 5. A novelist, journalist, critic, painter and sculptor, Tammuz served for many years as literary editor of the daily Haaretz.Learn more.


Berish Weinstein

Berish Weinstein (1905-1967) was a well-known American poet, born into a Jewish family in Rzeszów.Learn more.


Café Monopol

Itamar Ben Avi recalled that “you could read the best newspapers from Germany and all over the world” and meet “all of German Jewry, with its guests from Moscow, Warsaw, Odessa, Vilna, Lemberg, Prague…you merely had to order a cup of coffee with a single pastry on the side, and this enabled you to spend many hours there.” In Café Monopol, which was opposite the train station of Friedrichstraße, not far from the Scheunenviertel, Ben Avi claimed that “together with Aharon Hermoni…we created our own corner, our own table – the first Eretz Israeli corner,” where they “met every evening” and “edited Sokolow’s Ha-olam.” Ha-olam, the Hebrew counterpart of Die Welt—the official German-language organ of the Zionist Organization—was created in 1907 with Nahum Sokolow in charge, but in fact it was edited by Aharon Hermoni (Ginsburg) for a couple of years before it moved to Vilna, Odessa and other cities. Hermoni, who also spent time in Berlin as a student and journalist, wrote that during this time:    Café Monopol was considered the Zionist center in Berlin. Every Zionist activist from Russia-Poland who passed through Berlin knew that in the café…he could meet at any time colleagues from east and west and friends from the Zionist congresses….In this café, we, the few Hebraists in Berlin, created a “Hebrew corner”… The language spoken on this table in the café was Hebrew, and this was a novelty, almost a miracle: The Berlin Zionists were visiting this table from to time, to hear how modern, cultured people converse in the language of the prophets. Even the gentile waiters – among them the head waiter, Eduard the magnificent – were welcoming us with “Shalom.”[i] These memoirs all highlight the “Hebrew corner” and the Zionist activity at Café Monopol, but in fact this place in the heart of Berlin was a multilingual, transnational hub of communication and modern Jewish culture. [i] Aharon Hermoni, Be-‘ikvot ha-bilu’im (Jerusalem: Reuven Mass, 1951), 151.


Bernard Gershon Richards

Bernard Gershon Richards (1877-1971) was a Lithuanian-born American journalist, author, and communal worker.Learn more.


Bezalel London

Bezalel London (1900-1971) was an Israeli actor.


Boris Tomashevsky

Boris Tomashevsky (1868-1939) was an American theatrical performer from a shtetl in Kiev. In 1881, Tomashevsky immigrated to New York City, where he performed Yiddish theater in the Lower East Side.Learn more.


Brody Synagogue

brody-synagogue-2


Bruce Davidson

Bruce Davidson (b. 1933) is an American photographer. View Davidson's portfolio.Learn more.


Café Ambarzaki

According to the memoir of his friend Israel Trivus, one of Odessa’s Zionists, Jabotinsky said that in the Greek Café Ambarzaki, “there is an aroma of Asia, . . . but it creates an ambiance that takes you up to the sky, where there is no limit to your thought and imagination.”Playing on the Greek name of the café, Jabotinsky claimed that when he got to know this “lofty institution” well enough, he finally understood “the ancient Olympus, where one could enjoy ambrosia and nectar,” and that “God’s nectar is really a fragrant cup of Turkish-style coffee, and ambrosia is rahat lokum [Turkish delight] and halva.” However, it was not just the divine food and drink that Jabotinsky was attracted to but the conversation with the Greek owner of the café. He was enthralled with the visitors’ talk, which, according to Trivus, revolved around Greek and Jewish national movements and the emerging Zionist movement, as well as around the glories of Odessa, Pushkin’s poems (which Jabotinsky recited from memory), the city, and its cafés.


Café Ararat

cafe-ararat


Café Atara

cafe-atara


Café Bader

cafe-bader


Café Baghdadi

cafe-baghdadi


Café Bauer

cafe-bauer


Café Bauer

cafe-bauer-2


Café Bitan

cafe-bitan


Café Boulevard

cafe-boulevard


Café Bristol

cafe-bristol


Café Casino Nollendorfplatz

cafe-casino-nollendorfplatz


Café Éclair

cafe-eclair


Café Dobrin

cafe-dobrin


Café Fadul

cafe-fadul


Café Fanconi

The Swiss-owned Café Fanconi was opened in 1872. “By the end of the nineteenth century,” writes the historian Steven Zipperstein, “little was left…of [Odessa’s] Italians or French influences than a smattering of splendid, popular cafés—Café Fanconi was the best well-known.”


Café Fridman

cafe-fridman


Café Gedansky

cafe-gedansky


Café Genaty

cafe-genaty


Café Ginati-Yam

cafe-ginati-yam


Café Herlinger

cafe-herlinger


Café Horowitz

cafe-horowitz


Café Josty

cafe-josty


Café Katte Dan

cafe-katte-dan


Café Kranzler

cafe-kraniler-kranzler


Café Levanon (Lifshitz's Café)

cafe-levanon-lifshitzs-cafe


Café Libman

The Jewish-owned Café Libman was located in the well-known Passage building. In 1905, with the aborted Russian revolution and widespread pogroms, Libman became the target of an attack bombing by a group of socialist-anarchists whose mission was to spread propaganda in the factories and organize revolutionary labor unions as vehicles of class warfare. The café was soon renovated and would continue to flourish for another decade.


Café Lorenz

cafe-lorenz


Café Lunte

cafe-lunte


Café Polak

cafe-polak


Café Richelieu

cafe-richelieu


Café Robina

Café Robina was founded in the 1890s across from Café Fanconi. It was one of the most famous and fashionable cafés in Odessa, becoming an important component of Odessan identity and, in particular, cultivating an image of middle-class respectability. This provoked satirical observations by writers, many of them Jewish, such as in a feuilleton by a writer under the pseudonym of Satana (Satan) in Odesskaia pochta:“Every Odessan, regardless of social position, considers it necessary to go to the Robina or Fanconi at least once in their lives  . . . To live in Odessa and not go to the Robina is like being in Rome and not seeing the pope.”Local Odessa journalists even began to speak about a certain social type: the Robinisti, the habitué of Café Robina. The most typical Robinisti was presumably a young man, son of the middle class, well bred and well educated, who should have been the pride of polite society but was its nemesis. According to journalists, Robinistis were always immaculately dressed, giving every appearance of gentility, but in fact were devious, cynical men. The journalist Satana pointedly unmasked the young men as social frauds: “Look at them. They have chic visiting cards, collars brilliant and elegant, ties that are something delicious. All signs stamp them as higher gentlemen. But if you probe one, you will find a rogue, a thorough rogue.”


Café Rowal

cafe-rowal


Café Rzymska

cafe-rzymska


Café Sapphire

cafe-sapphire


Café Segal

cafe-segal


Café Shor

cafe-shor


Café Stehely

cafe-stehely


Café Sztuka

cafe-sztuka


Café Tarshish

cafe-tarshish


Café Zambrini

The Italian Café Zambrini was mentioned in German and English guidebooks for tourists in the 1880s and 1890s as one of the most established and popular cafés in Odessa. Anton Chekhov was known to have visited Zambrini. 


Hayim Zelig Słonimski

Hayim Zelig Słonimski (1810–1904), was an author of scientific texts in Hebrew, an inventor, the principal of the Zhitomir Rabbinical Seminary, and the founder and editor of the journal Ha-Tsefirah (The Dawn).Learn more.


Café Griensteidl

Kraus wrote about Café Griensteidl [in Die demolierte Literatur] when it was about to be torn down in 1879:Vienna is now being demolished into a metropolis. Together with the old houses the last pillars of our memories are falling, and soon an irreverent spade will have also leveled the venerable Café Griensteidl to the ground. This was the decision of its proprietors, the consequences of which cannot be foreseen. Our literature is bracing itself for a period of homelessness; the threads of artistic creativity are being cruelly severed...that coffeehouse, which like no other appeared suited to represent the true center of literary activity...Who does not remember the almost crushing profusion of newspapers and journals that made the visit to our coffeehouse a virtual necessity for those writers who had no craving for coffee?”63  (103)


Café Heinrichhof

cafe-heinrichhof


Café Herrenhof

cafe-herrenhof


Cafe Izibitzky

cafe-izibitzky


Café Landtmann

cafe-landtmann


Café Museum

cafe-museum


Café Rotunde

cafe-rotunde


Casino Galay-Aviv

casino-galay-aviv


Pod Picadorem

pom-picadorem


Charles Ignatius Pfaff

Charles Ignatius Pfaff (1813-1890) immigrated to New York from Switzerland in the early 1850s. In New York, he established the popular Bohemian beer cellar known simply as "Pfaff's." Learn more.


Charles Metzger

Charles Metzger (1896-1977) was the owner of the Garden Cafeteria at 165 East Broadway.​Learn more.


Garden Cafeteria

"Caféterias like the one described in Bellow’s novel became common starting in the wake of the Clutch Plague. They were spaces with self-service, offering cheap food and drink that allowed customers to choose items without the assistance of waiters and servers. On the other hand, the eating and drinking space provided the habitué with a place to socialize and talk. From the mid-1940s to the 1970s, caféterias attracted Jewish immigrants, Holocaust survivors, and even some American-born Jews, and persisted on the Lower East Side and in other immigrant neighborhoods. These caféterias served mostly as a bridge between the immigrant community, European Jews, and New York.130 "(214-215)


Christian Schad

Christian Schad (1894-1982)  was a German painter associated with Dada and the New Objectivity movement.Learn more and view his artwork.


Czartoryski Museum

czartoryski-museum


Daniel Bell

Daniel Bell (1919-2011) was an American sociologist and journalist born in Manhattan's Lower East Side to Jewish immigrant parents from Eastern Europe. He contributed majorly to the sociology of modernity. Learn more.


Daniel Persky

Daniel Persky (1887–1962) was a Hebraist, educator, and journalist. Born in Minsk, Persky settled in the United States in 1906 and, there, devoted all his efforts to the Hebraist movement.Learn more.


David Frishman

David Frishman (1859–1922) was a Hebrew and Yiddish writer and editor, literary critic, translator, and poet. Frishman’s literary views were influenced by European early modernism, and as a critic, he greatly valued the aesthetic form.​Learn more.


David Ignatov

David Ignatov (1885-1954) was a Yiddish writer and revolutionary. Born in Ukraine, Ignatov migrated to the United States in 1906 and eventually became one of the most active leaders of the Di yunge group that revolted against the literary conservatism of the Yiddish press at the time. Learn more.View a video about David Ignatov from Forverts.


Sholem's Cafe  (Herrick's Café) [NYC]

sholems-cafe-herricks-cafe-nyc


Dubrow's Cafeteria

dubrows-cafeteria


Duc de Richelieu Statue

duc-de-richelieu-statue


Sachs' Cafe

sachs-cafe


Tłomackie 13 (Union of Jewish Writers & Journalists)

union-of-jewish-writers-journalists


Goodman and Levine's Café

goodman-and-levines-cafe


IPS (Instytut Propagandy Sztuki "Institute for Propaganda and Art")

ips-instytut-propagandy-sztuki-institute-for-propa


Izbiski Café

izbiski-cafe


Jewish Museum

jewish-museum


KanKan Café

kankan-cafe


The "Demolished Literature" of Karl Kraus' Vienna

This path tells one story about Viennese literature through Karl Kraus' Die demolierte Literatur, or "Demolished Literature." What led Karl to write his satirical manifesto? What other artists and writers had converged in Vienna in that moment? What cafes had been emerging and were, at 1897, open and welcoming what Kraus considered the purveyors of this demolished literature?


Kawiarnia Honoratka

kawiarnia-honoratka


Kawiarnia Udziałowa

kawiarnia-udziaowa


Kolschitzky's café

kolschitzkys-cafe


Korim BaCafe

korim-bacafe


Krakouer Café & Pastry Shop

krakouer-cafe-pastry-shop


La Rotonde

la-rotonde


Leopoldstadt

leopoldstadt


About the Project

Transnational Jewish modernity was born in the cafe:This project examines the confluence between cafés, the urban environment, and the creativity of multilingual Jewish diasporic communities and uncovers a network of interconnected cafés that were central to the modern Jewish experience in a time of migration and urbanization. Explore all cafés or consider how culture traveled between urban centers like Vienna, Odessa, Warsaw, Berlin, Tel Aviv and New York City.Sites of Otherness:The institution of the coffeehouse was imported from the Ottoman Empire, and became increasingly popular all over Europe. But in spite of taking root in various cities, both the coffeehouse and the drinks that were consumed there originated far from the local soil. This “otherness,” and the mix of the national and transnational characteristics of the coffeehouse, helps to explain why many cafés in the nineteenth and twentieth century were owned by Jews, why Jews became their most devoted habitués, and how cafés became associated with Jewishness.Anchors in a silk road of modern Jewish cultureThis project is based on research done to write A Rich Brew: How Cafes Created Modern Jewish Culture. Like the book, this project shows how modern Jewish culture was nourished in cafes and sent out into the world of print, politics, literature, visual arts and theater. In this way, what was experienced and created in the space of the coffeehouse influenced thousands who read, saw, and imbibed a modern culture that redefined what it means to be a Jew in the world.For further introduction, listen to a podcast with Prof. Shachar Pinsker 


Nalewki Street

nalewki-street


Neue Synagoge

neue-synagoge


Nordbahnhof

nordbahnhof


Pfaff's beer cellar

pfaffs-beer-cellar


Richard Beer-Hofmann

This page provides another way to think about the Cafés in the collection: exploring the cafés across the world associated with one individual -- in this case, Richard Beer-Hofmann.Richard Beer-HofmannBorn: July 11, 1866 (Vienna, Austria)Died: September 26, 1945 (New York City)Occupation: Writer (poet)


Scheunenviertel

scheunenviertel


Schreiber's Café

schreibers-cafe


Shapiro's Café Central

shapiros-cafe-central


Shlosha Kushim Café

shlosha-kushim-cafe


Shmuel Yosef Agnon

37 Shmuel Yosef Agnon July 17, 1888 17-Feb-70 Galicia, Ukraine Jerusalem, Israel ./YoungAgnon1_vvDbv3e.jpg writerTel AvivBerlinJerusalemLembergContentsViennaVienna StorymapSholen's Café


Sholem's Café

sholems-cafe


Silver Coffeehouse

silver-coffeehouse


Sinsheimer Café

sinsheimer-cafe


Stefan Zweig

Perhaps nothing has contributed to the intellectual mobility and the international orientation of the Austrian as much as that he could keep abreast of all world events in the coffeehouse and at the same time discuss them in a circle of his friends.—Stefan Zweig, The World of Yesterday, 1944 (89)Stefan Zweig was born on November 28, 1881 in Vienna. In this example, I wanted to show how Scalar supports a personal story blended with a map (above) which allows you to find photographs grouped by cafe. You could also create a temporal story allowing you to follow a set of moves that an individual makes in their lifespan from spending time at the Arkaden/Arcaden Café earlier in life to the Garden Cafeteria later on . In this example, I imagined Zweig moved to New York City at some point, although the metadata notes Zweig died in Rio de Janiero, Brazil on February 22, 1942.


Turkischer Temple

turkisher-temple


Warszawska Café

warszawska-cafe


Zeitlin's Café

zeitlins-cafe


